This absolute lack of clarity is not unusual in early startups.  This is why one of the first workshops we hold for each startup is a [Value Proposition Canvas][vpc]{:target="_blank"}. This gives us a very good idea of how well our startups understand the problem they are trying to solve and provides a foundation for our relationship moving forward.

In completing this task we notice some common behaviours which prevent the candidates from achieving clarity until challenged by us:

 - When asked to explain their business they responded with their **vision** rather than with their **strategy**.  A classic example of this is a startup who told us that they were "ending disease in the third world". The danger with making a statement like this is that it prevents you from being realistic about the aims and limits of what you are building. It also makes it close to impossible to prioritise development which pretty much guarantees that your startup will fail (and disease in the third world will remain unvanquished). By all means be ambitious in your values but don't confuse them with the execution of your business.
 - Being too broad in the description of potential customers, not concentrating on those who will pay first.
 - Making vague statements like "it saves time/money". Of course it does.  Who is going to buy a solution that doesn't save time or money? What is important is *how much* time/money is saved (with evidence to prove it).
 - Describing the problem in terms of the solution. Solutions are not the problem, problems are the problem(!).  I can give you 20 solutions for any given problem but none of them will be the right solution unless you understand the problem completely.
 - Using buzzwords like "Machine intelligence", "AI" or "Blockchain" when describing a product/service.  These words are meaningless without context. Investors don't care *how* you're going to provide your value, as long as they believe your approach is *credible*.This absolute lack of clarity is not unusual in early startups.  This is why one of the first workshops we hold for each startup is a [Value Proposition Canvas][vpc]{:target="_blank"}. This gives us a very good idea of how well our startups understand the problem they are trying to solve and provides a foundation for our relationship moving forward.

[vpc]: <https://strategyzer.com/canvas/value-proposition-canvas>